# BENG 183 Final Paper - Precision Medicine
### Marianne Thio (Group 1)

## What is Precision Medicine? [5] [7] [8]
Precision medicine is a new and modern approach to understanding health by tailoring medical treatments to the individual characteristics of each patient. Precision medicine takes into consideration that each individual has personal variations in their genome sequencing due to mutations and their environmental exposure. It proposes the customization of the patient’s healthcare such as their medical decisions, treatments, and practices. Although the definition is misinterpreted to mean that drugs and medical devices are created uniquely to a patient, but it actually the ability to classify individuals into subpopulations that differ in the susceptibility to a particular disease.

Often times personalized medicine can be used instead of precision medicine. Originally, personalized medicine was used, but due to the concern that personalized medicine could be misinterpreted to imply that treatments and preventions are being developed uniquely for each individual. That is why, personalized medicine was replaced with precision medicine. Precision medicine instead implied more of a focus on identifying which approach will be effective for which patients based on a patient’s genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors. Although precision medicine is the proper term, precision medicine and personalized medicine can be used interchangeably.

Precision medicine is a different approach in comparison to the traditional medicinal approach, where there are standard tests and common drugs used to treat patients with the same symptoms. The traditional approach disregards individual's genetic variation and their reaction to drugs. Precision medicine allows doctors to select the best treatment that are most likely to help their patient, which are based on their genetic variation and the genetic understanding of their disease.

Precision medicine works by collecting, connecting, and analyzing information about an individual and their diseases. Precision medicine requires a patient's genetics, a patient's health history, their response to a disease, their lifestyle and information about the underlying causes of a disease. This information can come from a fitness tracker or from scientists that are currently discovering new facts about a disease in their lab. With all this information, scientists and researchers can understand an individual's health risk, how individuals respond to a disease or drug, ways to prevent diseases, and ultimately identifying treatments that will be effective for the patient. The more information that is collect, the better scientists and researchers will have in understanding health and ensures that every patient gets the right treatment, in the right dose, and at the right time.

Precision medicine involves the application of panomic analysis and systems biology to analyze the cause of an individuals patient’s disease at the molecular level and then to utilize targeted treatments to address that individual patient’s disease process. Panomic analysis is the analysis of molecular biology technologies, such as genomics, proteomics, metabolic, and transcriptomics. Systems biology is the computational and mathematical modeling of complex biological systems. 

## History of Precision Medicine Through the Lens of Breast Cancer Treatment [1]
In the 1970s, one of the treatments to breast cancer was the removal of the ovaries. With no ovaries, there was no release of estrogen and therefore no growth in the tumor. However, the removal of the ovaries only helped 70% of the patients with ER+ (estrogen-receptor positive) tumor. This showed the importance in how tumor cells are built, such as their genetic programming, markers on the surface and the growth circuit. With 70% of the breast cancer patients being ER+, it was found that they could be treated with an anti-estrogen agent that blocked the tumor growth. Then in the 1984s, microarray and gene expression profiling techniques were used to discover that a strain of breast caner developed from the abnormal HER-2 gene expression, which affected 20% of the patients. This lead to the development of a new drug called Herceptin. Herceptin inhibits the function of the protein created by the abnormal HER-2 gene.

In the 1990s, 5% of the breast cancer patients were found to have inherited the defect in genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. Although there is no preventive treatment, patient can be screened and watched for tumor formation closely. The overall history of treating breast cancer found that 85% of the breast cancer patient could be categorized and treated according to whether the tumor depended on estrogen to grow, whether the tumor proliferated by producing too many HER-2 proteins, or if there were any flaws in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene. Categorizing the cancer based on the specific abnormalities of the tumor before treating it can increase the percentage of patients who will benefit from the treatment.

## Precision Medicine in Cancer [2] [3]
The 3 main cancers focused in society include Lung Cancer, Kidney Cancer, and Breast Cancer. The current treatment for cancers includes surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and immunotherapy. However, which treatment is chosen depends on the type of cancer a patient has, the size of the tumor and whether the cancer has spread, or metastasized. Tumors with the same origin may be different in appearances, behavior, aggressiveness and vulnerability. With precision medicine, information about genetic changes in their tumor can help decide which treatment will work for each patient. Precision medicine aims to use the patient’s genetic information to decide the best treatment and also to prevent giving unhelpful treatments. One example of the use of precision medicine in treating caner is by using drugs that target cancer with specific gene changes. The impact of just using targeted cancer therapy has improved the survival rate of patients with cancer in comparison to the old survival rate without using targeted cancer therapy.

Unfortunately, the precision medicine approach to cancer treatment is not yet part of routine care for most patients.  However, many new treatments that are designed to target a specific gene change are currently being developed and tested in clinical trials. If there is a targeted drug or other treatments that have already been approved for a patient’s type of cancer, he or she can be tested to see if the genetic change targeted by the treatment is present in their cancer.  To find out whether the patient can be treated, the patient undergoes a biopsy, or a procedure in which the doctor removes a sample of the cancer, which is then sequenced to look for genetic changes that may cause the cancer to grow.

One of the main issues with precision medicine as a treatment is the cost. Treatments using precision medicine can be expensive and can also take many years of research to develop treatments that will target the changes that cause cancer to develop, grow, and spread. By the time these treatments are created and available on the market, they are very expensive and cannot be afforded. However, if a patient agrees to participate in the precision medicine clinical trial, the cost of the testing for genetic changes may be covered by the organization, or researcher, sponsoring the trial. 

## Pharmacogenomics [6]
Pharmacogenomics is the study of how genes affect a person’s response to a particular drug. Pharmacogenomics combines both pharmacology and genomics to develop effective, safe medications and doses that will be tailored to a person’s genetic makeup. This allows for a different approach from the “one size fits all” that are currently available for many drugs. However, the issue with this approach is that it is difficult to predict who will benefit from the medication, who will not respond at all, and who will experience negative side effects, which is a significant cause of hospitalization and deaths in the United States. With the information gained from the Human Genome Project, researches and scientists are leaning how inherited differences in the genes affect the body’s response to medications. These genetic differences will be able to predict whether a medication will be effective for a particular person and to help prevalent people from having negative side effects. Because pharmacogenomics is still relatively new the use is currently limited. However, in the future, pharmacogenomics will allow for the development of tailored drugs to treat a wide range of health problems. 

## RNA Technologies
In order to “measure” and “classify” a person’s disease type, various RNA detection and quantification methods are used. RNA can be used to quantify levels of gene expression. If there are an abnormalities, the specific genes or proteins that are causing the abnormalities be targeted. However, note every person of a certain disease may have the exact same abnormalities. Technologies that can be used to quantify levels of gene expression includes the northern blot, RT-qPCR, hybridization based on microarrays, and RNA-seq. With the quantifications obtained through gene expression assays, gene expression assays can depict differential gene expression and help identify patterns that can help classify different forms of a disease.  Understanding the genomic or transcriptomic diversity of diseases can help with better matching therapies for patients, which is fundamental idea of delivering precision medicine.

### Northern Blot
The northern blot, or RNA blot is a technique that is used to study gene expression by detection of RNA, or isolated mRNA in a sample. For the northern blot to work, the total RNA is extracted from the tissue of interest. Then the mRNA is isolated and run through gel electrophoresis to separate the stands by their size. The mRNA is then transferred into the nylon membrane and immobilized. The probes, which are designed to be complementary to specific RNA sequence, are then labeled and hybridized to RNA on the column. The probe’s signal can then be detected and used for quantification for that sequence.

### RT-qPCR [4]
RT-qPCR, or reverse transcription quantitative PCR is used to detect, characterize and quantify nucleic acids for gene expression. RT-qPCR differs from normal qPCR in that RNA is used instead. The reverse transcription of the RNA is done to synthesize cDNA from RNA which is used as the template for PCR.  Quantitative PCR is then used with fluorescent labeling, allowing for the quantification of the amplified DNA by employing the use of dsDNA binding dye.  During each cycle, the fluorescence is measured. The fluorescence signal increases proportionally to the amount of replicated DNA. Therefore, the DNA is quantified in “real time.”  This can be done with different RNA samples to compare the amounts of desired product detected.

### Hybridization Based Microarrays
Hybridization based microarrays is used to detect the expression of thousands of genes at a time. Hybridization based microarrays utilizes reverse transcription to produce CDNA from the RNA. These are then labeled and added to the microarray where they are hybridized to the spots containing complementary sequences of known genes. Then to measure gene expression, the detection of fluorescent signals in each spot is done.

### RNA-seq [9]
RNA-seq, or RNA sequencing, is used to reveal the presence and quantity of RNA in a biological sample at a given moment and can be used to analyze the continuously changing cellular transcriptome. RNA-seq starts by isolating, fragmenting and size selecting mRNA. Then cDNA is synthesized and prepared for sequencing by ligating adaptors. The expression is then quantified by counting the number of reads that map to each gene, which can be compared between samples. In contrast to the previous technologies, RNA-seq is not limited to detecting only a certain set of known sequences because it can account for all transcripts in the cell for each condition and is not depend on probes or sequence specific primers. 

## References
[1] Hedenfalk, Ingrid A. “Gene Expression Profiling Can Distinguish Tumor Subclasses of Breast Carcinomas.” Gene Expression Profiling by Microarrays, pp. 132–161., doi:10.1017/cbo9780511545849.008. 

[2] Munoz, Javier, and Razelle Kurzrock. “Targeted Therapy in Rare Cancers—Adopting the Orphans.” Nature Reviews Clinical Oncology, vol. 9, no. 11, Nov. 2012, pp. 631–642., doi:10.1038/nrclinonc.2012.160. 

[3] “Precision Medicine.” National Cancer Institute, www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/types/precision-medicine. 

[4] “TechNote: What Are the Differences between PCR, RT-PCR, QPCR, and RT-QPCR?” Enzo Life Sciences, 27 July 2018, www.enzolifesciences.com/science-center/technotes/2017/march/what-are-the-differences-between-pcr-rt-pcr-qpcr-and-rt-qpcr?/. 

[5] Toward Precision Medicine: Building a Knowledge Network for Biomedical Research and a New Taxonomy of Disease. National Academies Press, 2011. 

[6] “What Is Pharmacogenomics? - Genetics Home Reference - NIH.” U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, ghr.nlm.nih.gov/primer/genomicresearch/pharmacogenomics. 

[7] “What Is Precision Medicine? - Genetics Home Reference - NIH.” U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, ghr.nlm.nih.gov/primer/precisionmedicine/definition. 

[8] “What Is the Difference between Precision Medicine and Personalized Medicine? What about Pharmacogenomics? - Genetics Home Reference - NIH.” U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, ghr.nlm.nih.gov/primer/precisionmedicine/precisionvspersonalized. 

[9] Xu, Joshua, et al. “Comprehensive Assessments of RNA-Seq by the SEQC Consortium: FDA-Led Efforts Advance Precision Medicine.” MDPI, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 15 Mar. 2016, www.mdpi.com/1999-4923/8/1/8/htm.
